About FREDLIN:
The idea for FREDLIN arose in 2010 with my desire for "ed" to be easier to 
use.  It was my first time editing in Linux with the command line and only 
"ed" and "vi" were available.  I have never been able to get on with 
"vi", so I was left struggling with "ed".

The DOS line editor "EDLIN" was created by Tim Paterson (the genius behind 
the original release of DOS) in about 1980.  It has long been a simple-to-use 
line editor and I thus quickly identified it as a good replacement, at least 
for what I was doing.  I searched long and hard online to try to see if there 
was any project to port it across, but in vain.

Years later, I decided to port it across.  I thought I might be onto 
something when I found the source online for the FreeDOS version, however the 
author had changed too much of the program for my taste.  I even looked 
at disassembling the original program, but didn't get very far.  In the end, I 
decided to re-write it from scratch.

I had to change a few Ctrl actions for compatibility with the Linux 
platform and write a new line-entry system to support the original 86-DOS 
"Template" system, but the result you see before you: the result of five 
years of procrastination, plus a couple of week's work.

Please note that this is the first program I've written in C in four years, so 
apologies if it is not as efficient as it could be.


The line numbering system:
Line numbers in FREDLIN are dynamically assigned to the lines in the file and 
will change if a new line is inserted (see Inserting lines [HI]) earlier in 
the file.  A specific line (initially the first, then usually the last to be 
edited) is designated as the "current" line and is marked by an asterisk 
("*") when the file is listed (see Listing lines [HL]).

A line number can be specified in the following ways:
-	As an actual number (the number of the line) between 1 and 
	2147483647.  If the number is greater than the largest existing line 
	number then the line after the last existing line will be specified.
-	As a full stop ("."), which denotes the "current" line.
-	As a hash ("#"), which denotes the line after the last 
	one currently in existence (this is the same as specifying a line 
	number greater than that of the last line in the file).

If no line number is given when one is required by a command, it will 
default to a certain value (dependent upon the command in question).

A range of lines can be specified two line numbers separated either by a 
comma (",") or a dash ("-") but NOT a space.  A range CANNOT be written 
without an explicit end ("3-"): to specify lines 3 to the end use "3-#".


Typing in FREDLIN:
FREDLIN uses a "Template" system for commands.  When typing a command, the 
template is the last command typed.  When editing a line (see Editing lines 
[H1]), the template is the original contents of the line.  When inserting 
lines (see Inserting lines [HI]), the template is the last line to be 
inserted.  When typing replacement text for a "Replace" command (see 
Replacing text [HR]), the template is the text to find.  As you type, the 
current position in the template is advanced unless "Insert Mode" is on.

The following key combinations work with the template:
ESC S or F1	This copies one character from the template to the current line.
ESC T or F2	This must be followed by a character and copies all characters 
		from the template up to but not including the next occurrence 
		in the template of the specified character.  If the specified 
		character does not occur from the current point in the 
		template onwards, no characters are copied to the line and the 
		position in the template does not advance.
ESC U or F3	This copies all remaining characters from the template to 
		the line.
ESC V or F4	This skips over one character in the template.
ESC W or F5	This must be followed by a character.  It skips over all 
		characters in the template, up to but not including the next 
		occurrence of the specified character in the template after 
		the current point.  If the specified character does not 
		appear, no characters are skipped.
ESC P		This turns on "Insert Mode".  In this mode, as characters are 
		typed to the line, the current position in the template does 
		not advance.
ESC Q		This turns off "Insert Mode".  Outside of this mode, the 
		position in the template is advanced for each character typed 
		to the line.  This is the default mode.
INS		This toggles "Insert Mode" on and off.  By default, it is 
		off.
ESC R or F8	This changes the template to be the current line.  The current 
		line as typed into the buffer is cleared and "Insert Mode" is 
		turned off.  On the screen, an At sign ("@") is written 
		followed by a new line.

A line ends with a new line, the new line character being included in the 
line.  The maximum length of a line is 255 characters, however you can make a 
line "wrap" to a new line.  To do this, end the line with a CTRL+Y.  This 
submits the line without the new line character appended to the end.  If 
editing a line in this way you will need to insert (see the "I" command) the 
remains of the line afterwards.

You can clear the current line and start again by pressing CTRL+X.

You can cancel the current line by pressing CTRL+D if FREDLIN has been 
compiled without the "-DSIGINTTOCANCEL" flag set, or CTRL+C otherwise.  This 
will cancel editing and leave from inserting text, discarding the current 
line.  Any lines entered previously will not be affected.  All commands can 
be terminated in this way unless they require a specific Y/N answer.

CTRL+L is used to specify the use of a line break in search or replace text as 
part of the Search command (see The "Search" command [HS]) or Replace 
command (see Replacing text [HR]) respectively.  It is therefore recommended 
that you do not use this character as part of the text in your file.


Editing Lines:
To edit a line, simply type its line number as a command.  If the line number 
is not specified (that is, a blank command is entered) the line after the 
"current line" (see The line numbering system [H.]) is edited.  You can only 
edit lines that already exist: to enter text in an empty file, you will need 
to use the Insert command (see Inserting lines [HI].)

The line to be edited will be displayed with its line number and the new line 
will be entered below it.  If no changes are needed, press CTRL+D to cancel 
the edit (unless FREDLIN has been compiled with the "-DSIGINTTOCANCEL" flag 
set, in which case press CTRL+C): do not press Return as this will replace 
the line with a blank line.  Otherwise, you can enter your replacement line 
with the old one as the "Template" (see Typing in FREDLIN [H-]).


Listing lines:
There are two ways of listing lines in FREDLIN: the List command and the Page 
command.  Both list a specified range of lines.  The lines are listed preceded 
by the line number (see The line numbering system [H.]) and an asterisk 
("*") if it is the current line.  If a line does not end with a line-break 
and thus "wraps" to the next line, the following line (the one it wraps to) 
will be preceded by a hyphen ("-").  A file that does not end with a linebreak
will, when listed, display a hyphen before the next prompt.

The List command:
The list command comprises of a range of lines (see The line numbering system 
[H.]) followed by the letter "L".  If the first line number in the range is 
not specified, the "current line" (see The line numbering system [H.]) will 
be assumed.  If the second line number in the range is omitted, 23 lines will 
be listed; from 11 lines before the first line number to 11 after it.  If the 
first line is fewer than 11 lines before the first line number then additional 
lines will be listed at the end.  Therefore, if the range is omitted entirely 
(and thus the command consists entirely of the letter "L"), 23 lines, 
starting from 11 before the current line if possible, will be listed.  The 
"current line\" is not changed.

The Page command:
The page command also comprised of a range of lines (see The line numbering 
system [H.]) but followed by the letter "P".  If the first line number in 
the range is not specified then the first line in the file is assumed.  If the 
second line number in the range is omitted then the last line in the file is 
assumed.  Therefore, if the range is not specified, the whole file will be 
listed.  The "current line" is then changed to be the last line listed.


Quitting FREDLIN:
There are two ways to quit FREDLIN: the Quit command and the Exit command.

The Quit command:
The Quit command comprises simply of the letter "Q".  It quits FREDLIN 
without saving the open file, thus if the file has changed since it was last 
saved then any changes are lost.  If changes to the file have been saved since 
the file was opened, the original file will be preserved as a file with 
".BAK" appended to the filename.  FREDLIN will ask you to confirm that you 
wish to quit before taking this action.

The Exit command:
The Exit command comprises simply of the letter "E".  It saves any changes 
in the open file first before quitting FREDLIN.  The original file (before 
editing) is preserved with ".BAK" appended to its filename.  FREDLIN will not 
ask you to confirm before taking this action.


Saving your file:
To save your file, use the Write command.  This comprises simply of the letter 
"W".  The file as it exists in memory will be saved to the original 
filename.  The original file will be preserved, however, with ".BAK" 
appended to its filename.


Inserting lines:
To insert lines into the file, use the Insert command.  This is comprised of a 
line number followed by the letter "I".  The new line will be inserted 
before the specified line.  If the line number is not specified, the "current 
line" (see The line numbering system [H.]) is assumed.  If a line number 
greater than the number of lines in the file is specified then the new line 
will be appended to the end of the file.

After entering this command, you can enter as many lines as you wish, ending 
them with a return (or a CTRL+Y if you wish the text to "wrap" onto the next 
line).  To exit from this mode back to entering commands, press CTRL+D if 
FREDLIN has been compiled without the "-DSIGINTTOCANCEL" flag set, or CTRL+C 
otherwise.  When you do this, the line you were entering at the time will be 
discarded but any lines entered prior to this will be inserted into the file 
at the specified point.  The last line inserted will become the "current 
line" (see The line numbering system [H.]).


Deleting lines:
To delete lines in a file, use the Delete command.  This is comprised of a 
range followed by the letter "D".  Please note that ALL the lines in the 
specified range will be deleted.  If the first line number in the range is 
omitted, the "current line" (see The line numbering system [H.]) is 
assumed.  If the second line number in the range is omitted, it is assumed to 
be the same as the first so that only one line is deleted.  Therefore, if the 
range is omitted, the current line is deleted.  The line immediately following 
the deleted text will then become the "current line" (or the last line if 
the range was at the end of the file) and will have the same line number as 
the first line deleted .  FREDLIN will then tell you how many lines were 
deleted.


Moving lines:
To move lines to another part of the file, use the Move command.  This is 
comprised of a range representing the lines you want to move, followed by a 
comma (","), followed by the line number to which you want to move these 
lines, followed by the letter "M".  The range of lines will be moved to the 
position between the specified line and the one before it.  If the first line 
number in the range is omitted, the first line in the file will be assumed.  
If the second line number in the range is omitted, it is assumed to be the 
same as the first; that is, only one line will be moved.  If the destination 
line number is omitted, the command will fail.  If the destination line is 
within the range of lines to move, the command will fail.


Copying lines:
To copy lines to another part of the file, use the Copy command.  This is 
comprised of the range to copy, followed by a comma (","), followed by the 
line to which to copy the lines, followed by another comma, followed by the 
number of copies to make, followed by the letter "C".  The range of lines 
will be copied to the position between the specified line and the line before 
it.  If the first line number in the range is omitted, the first line in the 
file is assumed.  If the second line in the range is omitted, it is assumed to 
be the same as the first (that is, only one line will be copied).  If the 
destination line is omitted, the command will fail.  If the number of copies 
to make is omitted, it is assumed to be 1 (that is, only one copy will be 
made).


The "Search" command:
To search for a specific piece of text in the file, use the "Search" 
command.  You can only search for a piece of text that exists entirely on one 
line: if a line ends or "wraps" during that text then it will not be found.  
The Search command is comprised of a range (indicating where is to be 
searched), followed by an optional question mark ("?"), followed by the 
letter "S", followed by the text for which to search.  If the first line 
number in the range is omitted, the first line in the file is assumed.  If the 
second line number in the range is omitted, the last line in the file is 
assumed.  Therefore, if the range is omitted, the whole file is searched.  If 
the text for which to search is omitted, the command will fail.

The line break at the end of the command is not considered part of the text 
for which to search.  As such, if you wish to search for text at the end of 
the line (that is, that includes the line break), you can substitute in the 
CTRL+L key combination (which will appear as a colour-inverted letter "L" on 
screen, assuming your display allows for colour inversion).  It is as such 
recommended that you do not include this key combination as part of the file 
itself.

The specified range of lines will be searched for the specified search text.  
If the search text is not found in any of the specified lines, FREDLIN will 
inform you of this, otherwise the line containing the found text will be 
listed (see Listing lines [HL] for the format).  If the question mark ("?") 
has been specified before the "S" in the command then you will be asked 
whether or not this is the correct occurence of the search text in the range.  
If the answer to this question is "Y" or if the question mark is not 
specified in the command then the line of the found search text becomes the 
current line and the command will end.  Otherwise, the search will continue 
and you will be prompted each time the search text is found.


Replacing text:
You can search for a specific piece of text in the file and have it 
automatically replaced with another piece of text using the Replace command.  
This is comprised of a range specifying where to search, followed by an 
optional question mark ("?"), followed by the letter "R", followed by the 
text for which to search.  After entering this command, you will be prompted 
to enter the text with which to replace the search text.  You can then enter 
it, using the search text as the "Template" (see Typing in FREDLIN [H-]).  
If the first line number in the range is omitted, the first line in the file 
is assumed.  If the second line number in the range is omitted, the last line 
in the file is assumed.  Therefore, if the range is omitted, the entire file 
will be searched.  If the search text is omitted, the command will fail.  If 
the replace text is omitted (that is, a blank line is submitted) then it is 
considered to be "null", effectively deleting occurences of the search text.

If the question mark ("?") is not specified before the letter "R" in the 
command then all occurences of the search string in the specified lines will 
automatically be replaced by the replace text and the line in which the 
replacement occurs displayed.  Otherwise, every time the search text is found 
in the specified lines, FREDLIN will display the line as it would be if the 
replacement was made.  You will then be asked if this is correct.  If you 
answer "Y", the replacement will be made, otherwise it will not.  The search 
will then continue, prompting you for each replacement, until all the 
specified lines have been searched.

The line break at the end of the command is not considered part of the text 
for which to search or the replacement text.  As such, if you wish to search 
for text at the end of the line (that is, that includes the line break), you 
can substitute in the CTRL+L key combination (which will appear as a 
colour-inverted letter "L" on screen, assuming your display allows for 
colour inversion).  You should then use it in the correct place in the 
replacement string unless you want the replacement lines to "wrap".  Do not 
use it to place line-breaks in the middle of lines as this will cause 
unpredictable behaviour and you may lose the end of the line.  It is as such 
recommended that you do not include this key combination as part of the file 
itself.

The CTRL+D command (or the CTRL+C command if FREDLIN has been compiled with 
the "-DSIGINTTOCANCEL" flag set) cannot be used to stop the Replace command 
once it has begun, so it is recommended that you are very careful with this 
command.


Merging files:
FREDLIN allows you to merge another file into the one that is currently open 
by using the Transfer command.  This comprises of the line number of the line 
at which to insert the file, followed by the letter "T", followed by the 
filename (including the path if it's in another directory) of the file you 
wish to merge into the current file.  The specified file will be inserted 
between the specified line and the line before it, such that the first line of 
the inserted file becomes the specified line.  If the line number is not 
specified, the "current line" (see The line numbering system [H.]) will be 
assumed.


Version information and Credits:
FREDLIN 0.61.02 BETA
2015-17 DHSC, 2017-2021 The FREDLIN Project
Contact me on Twitter @DHeadshot or the Fediverse @dheadshot@mastodon.social
This program is now Free Open-Source Software - distribute it as you like.

This program uses the Quick and Dirty Input Library - see 
http://github.com/dheadshot/libqdinp2 for more details.

The "mygetch" routine used as a basis for the input library was created by VvV 
and kermi3 on the CProgramming.com boards, so thanks to them for that.

FREDLIN was inspired by the original EDLIN, created by Tim Paterson.  None of 
his code or that of Microsoft has been used in this program though.
